



             Paris Metro Pricing:  The minimalist differentiated
                           services solution


                            Andrew Odlyzko

                        AT&T Labs - Research

                           April 10, 1999



Abstract:

Differentiated services for the Internet are undergoing intensive
development.  It is widely accepted that they will require usage
sensitive pricing.  The Paris Metro Pricing (PMP) proposal is to rely
on pricing alone to provide differentiated services.  PMP is the
simplest differentiated services system in terms of complexity.



1.  Introduction

The Internet currently provides only best-effort service that treats
all packets equally.  However, there is wide dissatisfaction with the
perceived performance, and there appears to be a wide consensus that
new applications, especially real time ones such as packet telephony,
will require changing how the Internet operates.  Various QoS (quality
of service) techniques are being developed and are beginning to be
deployed.  (For a general survey and references, see [FergusonH].)
They will provide differentiated service levels.  Many of these
schemes are complicated, and involve substantial costs in both
development and operations.  Furthermore, since the basic problem is
that of allocating a limited resource, it is widely accepted that all
solutions will have to involve pricing mechanisms, to prevent users
from sending all their traffic in the highest priority class.

I propose to simplify the problem by using simple pricing to provide
congestion control.  The proposal, called Paris Metro Pricing, or PMP,
is to partition the main network into several logically separate
channels.  In the basic design, each would have a fixed fraction of
the capacity of the entire network.  (Many variations on this proposal
are possible and some are discussed briefly in Section 2.)  All
channels would route packets using protocols similar to the current
ones, with each packet treated equally.  The only difference between
the channels would be that they would charge different prices.
Customers would choose the channel to send their packets on (possibly
on a packet-by-packet basis), and would pay accordingly.  There would
be no formal guarantees of quality of service, with packets handled on
a "best effort" basis.  The expectation is that the channels with
higher prices would be less congested than those with lower prices.

The PMP proposal was inspired by the Paris Metro system.  Until about
15 years ago, when the rules were modified, the Paris Metro operated
in a simple fashion, with 1st and 2nd class cars that were identical
in number and quality of seats.  The only difference was that 1st
class tickets cost twice as much as 2nd class ones.  (The Paris
regional RER lines still operate on this basis.)  The result was that
1st class cars were less congested, since only people who cared about
being able to get a seat, etc., paid for 1st class.  The system was
self-regulating, in that whenever 1st class cars became too popular,
some people decided they were not worth the extra cost, and traveled
2nd class, reducing congestion in 1st class and restoring the
differential in quality of service between 1st and 2nd class cars.

Pricing is a crude tool.  Different applications vary in requirements
for bandwidth, latency, and jitter, for example.  PMP would not
provide any specific QoS guarantees.  The justification for PMP is
that, for all its deficiencies, the Internet does work, and with low
congestion, even real-time applications run well.  The main motivation
behind PMP is to keep the Internet as simple as possible for the user.

The pricing mechanism of PMP is about as simple as that of any usage
sensitive pricing scheme that has been proposed for the Internet.
Thus the additional complexity it would introduce is minimal, and
appears inevitable, since usage sensitive pricing appears inevitable.
The advantage of PMP is that it would provide congestion control
essentially for free, once the pricing mechanism is in place, with
only minor changes to the network infrastructure being required to
handle the traffic management tasks.

PMP is also designed to be acceptable to users, who have a strong
preference for flat-rate pricing.  It appears that consumers are
willing to tolerate substantial variation in quality of a service or a
product, but strongly prefer simple and predictable pricing schemes.

At a high level, PMP is similar to diff-serv, perhaps the most popular
of the QoS techniques being developed.  The difference is that
diff-serv does not by itself say anything about assignment of
priorities and pricing.  It treats only the technical aspect of how
the network should deal with packets with different markings.  PMP
integrates pricing with traffic management.

This position paper only outlines PMP. More details and references are
available in the initial proposal [Odlyzko0].  For other references on
pricing proposals, see the Web pages [Economides,MacKieM,Varian].


2.  PMP

The main idea of PMP is simply to have several channels that differ in
price.  They would offer different expected quality of service through
the action of users who select the channel to send their data on.

The number of channels in PMP should be small, possibly just two, but
more likely three or four.  Having few channels minimizes losses from
not aggregating all the traffic, and also fits consumer preferences
for simple schemes.

The basic version of PMP mentioned in the Introduction assigns to each
channel a fixed fraction of the capacity of the entire network.  One
can also use weighted priorities, as in the weighted round-robin
technique [FergusonH].  The advantage of the priority approach is that
the full gain from aggregating all traffic on one network would be
obtained.  However, allowing high priority packets to block completely
lower priority ones violates the fairness criterion that appears to be
important to consumers.

In general, assignments of capacities and prices to the channels in
PMP should stay constant for extended periods.  This would fit
consumer preferences for simplicity and also allow usage patterns to
stabilize, and thus produce a predictable level of service on
different channels.  However, it would likely be desirable to have
different assignments of capacities and prices for nights and
weekends.


3.  PMP problems and solutions

Would users find the lack of guaranteed quality of service (QoS) of
PMP acceptable?  In voice telephony, experience has taught people to
expect a uniform and high level of service.  However, that is an
exception.  Most purchases (of books, cars, and so on) are made on the
basis of expected, not guaranteed, quality.  Experimental networks
such as vBNS, which have low utilization levels, are able to handle
all applications.  This suggests that PMP, a best-effort system
without guarantees, but with several channels of different congestion
levels, might satisfy most needs.

Would PMP survive in a competitive market?  There is an analysis of a
simplified version of PMP by Gibbens, Mason, and Steinberg [GibbensMS]
which shows that in their model, PMP would be optimal for a
monopolist, but a carrier offering PMP would lose to one offering
undifferentiated service.  However, whether this analysis poses
serious problems for PMP is not settled, since competition in
information goods in general is hard to model, and most analyses
predict destructive price wars (see [FishburnOS], for example).  Also,
it has not been shown yet how any other QoS scheme can be
realistically implemented in the Internet, which consists of many
heterogeneous subnetworks.

The remainder of this section concentrates on a few aspects of PMP.
The ability to assign varying capacities to the separate channels, and
also to vary prices for using those channels gives service providers
substantially more flexibility than might appear at first.

For the PMP proposal to work, the performance of the different
channels has to be predictable, at least on average.  Unfortunately,
the fractal nature of data traffic means that we have to expect that
all PMP channels will experience sporadic congestion.  This could lead
to network instability, with degradation on one channel propagating to
other channels.  There are several ways to overcome this problem
(should it turn out to be a serious one).  One is by modifying the
charging mechanism.  Access to the premium channels might be not on a
packet-by-packet basis, but instead the user would pay for the right
to send 1,000 packets on that channel in the next second.  This would
increase the financial barrier to upgrading channels.  Block pricing
could even be used in PMP to segregate streaming traffic from bursty
data transfers.


4.  PMP implementation

The PMP proposal can be regarded as a logical development of some
current trends.  A class of "premium ISPs" is developing, which
provide higher quality of service.  Customers with connections to
several ISPs would then have a choice similar to that in PMP. The PMP
proposal would simply let each ISP offer its customers an array of
choices that they might have available through different ISPs anyway,
and should therefore be more efficient.

PMP would be easy to introduce.  It would not be necessary to wait for
the deployment of IPv6 or other protocols.  The current IPv4 packets
already have a 3-bit priority field that is unused.  Since the number
of channels in PMP is likely not to exceed 4, this is more than
sufficient.  Interoperability would be easy, as all packets that do
not contain any bits indicating class of service could be sent on the
lowest cost (and lowest priority) channel.

At least initially, the cost per packet on the lowest cost channel
would undoubtedly be zero.  That would make this channel look like the
current Internet, and so make the transition easier.  It might also be
possible to have zero prices on this channel in the long run during
slack periods.

Inside the network, changes would only have to be done in the router
software.  It would be necessary to maintain logically separate queues
or to give appropriate priority to packets from different channels.
The current diff-serv QoS efforts in the IETF provide all the
technical tools for implementing PMP.

The major change required in a network by PMP is the same one as that
needed for any usage sensitive pricing scheme.  It would be necessary
to install hardware or software to count the packets and bytes for
each user.  Essentially all of this accounting could be done at the
edges of the network.

Flat rates are preferred by consumers, but they also have major
advantages for service providers.  They were already advocated for
broadband services by Anania and Solomon in [AnaniaS], a paper that
was first presented almost a decade ago.  On the Internet, they
eliminate the need for a traffic measurement and charging
infrastructure, which, even for a system such as PMP, where almost all
the work would be done at the edges of the network, would be costly to
implement.

In PMP, the preference for flat-rate pricing can be partially
accommodated by selling large blocks of transmission capacity (giving
the user the right to send or receive 100 MB of data over a week
through the lowest priced channel, or 60 MB through the next most
expensive channel, say).  Such pricing has worked well in long
distance telephony in the United States, with consumers typically
paying for more capacity than they used [MitchellV].

PMP offers a simple pricing plan with constant and easily understood
pricing, which is an advantage, as it fits consumer desires.  It does
not offer any service guarantees, however.  Such guarantees are
popular.  However, few guarantees are absolute, and most purchases are
made on the basis of expectations.  It seems likely that consumers
could accept the lack of guarantees of QoS in PMP, especially if the
average quality of different channels were predictable enough.


5.  Applications of PMP

There are experts in the data networking community who argue that
instead of working on complicated network schemes, all resources
should be devoted to improving capacity (the "fat dumb pipe" model).
The general consensus seems to be that this is not feasible, and that
differentiated services are required to overcome the problem of "the
tragedy of the commons," with rapid growth in traffic demand leading
to endemic congestion.  When I first proposed PMP [Odlyzko0], I shared
this view, but based on knowledge of how many networks are operated,
felt that one should strive for maximal simplicity even at the expense
of maximal efficiency in use of transport capacity.  A recent series
of studies [CoffmanO, Odlyzko1, Odlyzko2, Odlyzko3] has raised
questions about the basic assumptions that underlie the work on QoS,
or at least the backbones of the Internet.  Most of the Internet is
very lightly utilized, most of the problems are not caused by link or
switch congestion (which is what QoS measures address), and "the
tragedy of the commons" is much less of a problem than is commonly
believed.  It appears that in the backbones of the Internet, providing
a uniformly high quality of service to all transmissions might be not
just feasible, but optimal, given the full cost that any QoS measures,
even PMP, would impose.  However, it is impossible to be certain this
will be the case, since it is not clear how rapidly advances in
transmission technology will translate into lower prices.  If prices
do not decline (and they have been rising in recent years), some QoS
measures might be required even in the backbones.  In that case,
though, the studies mentioned above argue that nothing more
complicated than PMP should be implemented.  The reason is that
networking is already too complicated.  The behavior that has been
observed (such as many network managers knowing practically nothing
about the traffic on their networks, traffic staying on established
private line networks instead of much less expensive Frame Relay
services, and so on) shows that network managers already have too much
to do, and it is unrealistic for them to assign proper priorities to
different transmissions, say.  Thus the arguments for maximal
simplicity are very strong, and favor the use of PMP among all the
differentiated service schemes if any QoS measures are required.

The arguments that QoS is unlikely to be needed because of rapid
advances in photonics apply only to connections where fiber
connections are feasible.  There are bound to be many Internet
connections (especially wireless ones, but also in local access
through cable modem and ADSL) where available bandwidth will likely
continue to be much more limited.  In those contexts some QoS measures
are likely to be required, and PMP may be helpful.  For example, in
Internet access through cable TV, instead of assigning a fixed number
of households to each channel, one could have two channels with
different prices, and let the households sort themselves out among
them.



References:

[AnaniaS] L. Anania and R. J. Solomon, Flat--the minimalist price, pp.
91-118 in "Internet Economics," L. W. McKnight and J. P. Bailey, eds.,
MIT Press, 1997.  Preliminary version in "J.  Electronic Publishing,"
special issue on Internet economics, <http://www.press.umich.edu/jep/>.

[CoffmanO] K. G. Coffman and A. M. Odlyzko, The size and growth rate
of the Internet, "First Monday," 3(10) (October 1998),
<http://www.firstmonday.dk/>.  Also available at
<http://www.research.att.com/~amo>.

[Economides] N. Economides, The economics of networks, Web site with
links to online sources, <http://raven.stern.nyu.edu/networks/>.

[FergusonH] P. Ferguson and G. Huston, "Quality of Service:
Delivering QoS on the Internet and in Corporate Networks," Wiley,
1998.

[FishburnOS] P. C. Fishburn, A. M. Odlyzko, and R. C. Siders, Fixed
fee versus unit pricing for information goods:  competition,
equilibria, and price wars, "First Monday," vol.  2, no.  7 (July
1997), <http://www.firstmonday.dk/>.  Available at
<http://www.research.att.com/~amo>.

[GibbensMS] R. Gibbens, R. Mason, and R. Steinberg, Multiproduct
competition between congestible networks, available at
<http://www.soton.ac.uk/~ram2/papers.html>.

[MacKieM] J. MacKie-Mason, Telecom Information Resources on the
Internet, Web site with links to online sources,
<http://china.si.umich.edu/telecom/telecom-info.html>.

[McKnightB] L. W. McKnight and J. P. Bailey, eds., "Internet
Economics," MIT Press, 1997.  Preliminary version in "J.  Electronic
Publishing," special issue on Internet economics,
<http://www.press.umich.edu/jep/>.

[MitchellV] B. M. Mitchell and I. Vogelsang, "Telecommunications
Pricing:  Theory and Practice," Cambridge Univ.  Press, 1991.

[Odlyzko0] A. M. Odlyzko, A modest proposal for preventing Internet
congestion.  Unpublished manuscript, available at
<http://www.research.att.com/~amo>.

[Odlyzko1] A. M. Odlyzko, Data networks are lightly utilized, and will
stay that way.  Available at <http://www.research.att.com/~amo>.

[Odlyzko2] A. M. Odlyzko, The economics of the Internet:  Utility,
utilization, pricing, and Quality of Service.  Available at
<http://www.research.att.com/~amo>.

[Odlyzko3] A. M. Odlyzko, The Internet and other networks:
Utilization rates and their implications.  Available at
<http://www.research.att.com/~amo>.

[Varian] H. R. Varian, The economics of the Internet, information
goods, intellectual property and related issues, reference Web pages
with links, <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/resources/infoecon/>.

